DICOM's can be arranged into a hierarchy of series and studies.
With 2D imaging, a single 2D image like in X-ray is also known as a single DICOM series.
Usually though, a radiologist wants to acquire
several X-ray images of a patient to view them at different angles.
This results in a collection of 2D images or a collection of series.
All of these image series combined comprise a study of the patient,
also known as a DICOM study.
A DICOM file has a header that contains every piece
of information about the acquired image organized into a set of attributes.
These attributes are bits of information about
the image and the series and steady that it belongs to.
We'll talk about some specific attributes in a few minutes.
In addition to the header though,
DICOM files also contain an image that is
a set of pixel data representing the actual image.
Some of the key attributes contained in that DICOM header are the patient information,
such as name, ID,
birth date, and sex.
Before we discuss anymore attributes though,
let's take a pause and talk about something called Protected Health Information or PHI.
PHI refers to any information that can be used to identify an individual,
like patient name, age, and sex.
This type of information is very sensitive,
and it's protected under specific types of health care laws.
As we just saw,
non-image data such as patient name, age,
etc are all stored in the DICOM header and are tied to
the patient's medical record and can then be read by the reading radiologist.
You may be be surprised that the images themselves can also contain PHI.
For example, 3D header images are considered to contain PHI,
because you can actually reconstruct
a somebody's space from one of those images with computer vision,
keeping information confidential is very important in the medical industry.
Because as an industry partner,
your algorithm will have access to individually identifiable health information.
You have to make sure that you do not hold
that information outside of legal medical usage.
Let's go back to our DICOM header and its attributes.
In addition to the patient header information,
DICOM headers also contained the data needed
to tie them back to the study that they belong to.
Following from that, since each image is its own series,
the DICOM header also contains information that
uniquely identifies it as a standalone series.
Next, DICOM files also contain
information about the equipment that was used to acquire the image.
The DICOM header then contains a lot of
information about the image itself and how it was acquired.
Some of these attributes describe the settings on the device that acquired the image,
and some described the image itself,
like its size and resolution.
This final attribute down here, called pixel data,
contains the actual pixel data that represents the image itself.
This is not part of the DICOM header.
All of the items listed in the DICOM files are attributes,
and the blocks of different types of attributes such as patient study,
image, or information entities.
So what's not part of the DICOM?
Clinical data is not part of the DICOM.
Clinical diagnoses are not stored here.
When your algorithm opens a DICOM file for a patient,
none of the patient's current or past diagnoses are listed in the DICOM file.
In addition, DICOM also does not contain the patient's medical history.
So symptoms, lab results,
and other types of medical history are all stored in the EMR separate from imaging data.
This presents a unique challenge for medical imaging algorithm developers.
In the real-world, clinicians rely on all of this contextual information.
For clinicians, an image is really only a piece of clinical decision-making.
A medical imaging algorithm however,
usually has to make decisions based exclusively on
the medical imaging data alone without the benefit of the patient's clinical information.
Remember in our clinical workflow how we said that after looking at an image,
the radiologists generates a report.
This report is stored in the packs and the EMR usually,
but it's also not part of the DICOM.
Let's take a closer look though at what is in a standard radiologist's report,
because they are a great resource of information if you can
obtain them as part of your dataset from a clinical partner.
First, the report contains basic information about
where the image was taken and who the physician and radiologist are.
It then tells you what parts of the body are included in the study.
The radiologists then goes through every structure
visible in the image and report their findings about them.
Finally, they write what's called an impression,
which summarizes all of the findings into
a coherent story that suggests a diagnosis for the diagnosing clinician.